>> Sarah Drasner: You probably
know about monospaced fonts,
we use those all the time as a programmer.
You might know its counterpart,
which is proportional fonts
which is not monospaced.
The reason we call it monospaced is
because every letter takes the same amount
of space, whereas proportional, it's
proportional to how big the letters are.
That's probably easily known.
Kerning and no kerning, you've probably
heard people talk about kerning, right?
Kerning is the space between the letters
and whether or not they kind of tuck and
nest into each other appropriately or not.
So kerning applied, and no kerning.
So no kerning, they're just,
here's a letter and a space for
that letter, here's another letter.
But you can see how A and
V would then look visually very far
apart from each other and then probably to
close for some of the other characters.
Whereas kerning applied kind of
compensates for that with your eye, so
it looks a little bit
more evenly balanced.
Leading is a space up and down.
So kerning would be like
letter spacing in CSS world,
leading would be like
line height in CSS world.
The reason why we call it leading is
because when you're typesetting a book,
you use lead letters.
And then in order to make the letters
further apart from each other,
you put a tiny little piece lead
that's like a little strip,
like you see right there
in between those blocks.
So you'd add more leading,
you're adding more lead literally.
So some of these old things.
So leading is the space between
the baselines, ascender, midline,
baseline, descender, that's for
all of those letters.
And [LAUGH] there's all these jokes,
I love this XKCD one.
If you really hate someone teach
them to recognize bad kerning.
It's one of those things where
before you know what it is,
you don't really notice it, and
once you do it's really bothersome.
It's just one thing that
can really drive you crazy.
It's important to do, [LAUGH] to work with
kerning well because you can make
accidents happen if you don't.
So make sure that there's adequate
spacing between your letters.
If you're working with Photoshop or
Illustrator, something like that.
In order to change it from,
basically it's always gonna
assume you want metrics as the default,
you see in the character palette.
Switch to optical, and then it will be
well kerned, it will kind of understand
kerning better, of course,
this doesn't translate to the web.
For the web, you pretty much have to look
at whether the fontographer who made
the font took that into
consideration when they made it.
But in Photoshop, if you're making
something for print that works.
So kerning encode letter-spacing,
leading encode, line-height.
And then there's also vertical alignment,
whether or
not you're aligning with the baseline,
mid, things like that.
Widows and orphans, this is another thing
that I probably shouldn't teach you,
because you'll start to
notice it everywhere.
[LAUGH] A widow is when you have this one
word that just kinda hangs out
at the end of a paragraph.
I used to do layout for
magazines, and widows and
orphans were what I worked on constantly.
An orphan is when you go
to the next paragraph.
Orphans really bother people,
they don't know why.
But it just doesn't,
you're trying to read the paragraph and
then ends really awkwardly because
there's just another piece there.
Widows are not as big of a deal, I think.
If you have content that's
generated from an API,
you probably can't do
anything about these things.
But if you do have some
kind of text lockups or
things that are kind of titles and
things like that that you can work on,
it's good to keep an eye on this stuff and
make sure just knock it into place.
So if I was working on this widow one,
that it is,
I would probably break after the it is.
You see that on the second line,
how it kind of jets out?
I would do a hard-break there and
that would push that line out, so
I would no longer have a widow.
So widows and orphans,
that what those look like.
>> Sarah Drasner: Yeah, again,
more widows and orphans good versus bad,
it actually is easier on your eyes
to read without those widows and
orphans hanging out there.
Ligatures, ligatures are different for
code and
code editors than they are for
books and things.
So there are some fonts that take these
types of things in consideration.
So if you you have the one on the right,
they understand that if you have and f and
an i next to each other that they should
be joined and it would make more sense.
Then it kinda looks clumsy
in the first example,
they're just kind of
glopped next to each other.
Code ligatures are pretty cool and
I actually really like them,
some people don't like them.
You can work with different symbols and
it actually turns them into that symbol.
So for instance, if you're making an arrow
function, it would be an equal and
an arrow, but
it actually turns it into an arrow.
Or the one that I really
love is the three equals
becomes a solid block of three equals.
Some people say that for them it's less
legible, I think it's more legible.
Everyone is gonna be,
feel a little bit different about them.
So if they're talking about, if you hear
someone talking about their code editor,
and ligatures, that's what they mean.
>> Sarah Drasner: I'm not going over
all this terminology, don't worry.
It's just in here in case you wanna get
super nerdy, and you wanna dive in.
Again, not gonna go over all of this,
but if you wanna dive in.
>> Sarah Drasner: One thing that Burke's
figured out a while ago is that you can't
center things in the middle of a page and
actually when I learned this I was,
no way.
[LAUGH] And I went and opened up all
of my books, and was, is this true?
And it turns out that it is true.
I opened up every single one,
all of the text
always has a bigger space
on the bottom than the top.
They center it in the middle of the page,
and then they push the text up so
that there's more space on the bottom.
Because if it's centered,
it looks like the text is falling down.
It doesn't look,
it's like the circle for some reason.
The circle needs a line,
it needs to be outside the line in
order to look visually consistent.
This is another one of those
things where if I took a book and
I put the text right in the middle,
you'd be, why is the text so low?
Go home and open up all your books,
they all have way more space
on the bottom than the top.
And you can use that in
your web designs too,
although I don't know that
it works the same way.
In terms of font performance, this is
something that you should care about.
Zach Leatherman writes a lot of
materials about font performance, and
he just has a blog that's full of
really good materials on how to get
the most out of font performance.
I think I followed one of his blog
posts on this giant application I
was working with.
I made the performance of the site better
by two seconds, two seconds is a lot.
Completely shaved that
off just by changing
the way that we were loading
the fonts in our fonts strategy.
So definitely check out
his writings about that.
Peter Mueller took some
of what Zach wrote,
there's a lot of stuff
that you have to do.
So he created this thing called
sub-font that kind of automates some
of these tasks for you.
So definitely check out his work there,
there's a lot of really good stuff in it.
Robin Randall who I worked
with at CSS Tricks has
a newsletter all about typography.
And he's super good at typography and
he knows everything about typography and
he should probably teach
this section of this course.
He has newsletter about it, and
it's a really great newsletter.
He kind of muses on typography,
and things he's seen, and
he goes to conferences and
all sorts of stuff.
So if you're interested in type,
he's someone to follow.
When we're creating, remember how I
was using Lorem text when I was using
Emmet and I was just dumping some
text in there as placeholder.
There's all sorts of ways of
generating text, Bacon Ipsum,
Hipster Ipsum, Cat Ipsum.
By the way,
Hipster Ipsum has some bad words,
which I didn't realize until I was in
the middle of a review with the CEO.
So just letting you know.
[LAUGH] They're like, does that say this?
I'm like [LAUGH] no, [LAUGH] HodorIpsum,
[LAUGH] Pirate Ipsum,
Slipsum to Samuel L Jackson Ipsum.
[LAUGH] So
there's a lot of options out there.
So there's no need for
your Lorem Ipsum to be super
boring if you don't want it to be.